[framework] optimized category sorting in admin (#2328)
shopsys/shopsys: docs/cookbook/import-categories.md

> # Import categories

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Import Categories
```

Category import is one of the specific imports.
Due to the tree structure it's really easy to create ineffective script.
In this cookbook we highlight some concepts and how to improve category import performance.

## Task

> > _As an eshop owner I want to import categories from IS, so I don't need to edit categories on the two places._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> _As an eshop owner I want to import categories from IS, so I don't need to edit categories in two places._
```

Let's presume we already have working information system, and we are able to obtain data we need.
For the future references we can imagine it as a method with following description

```php
public function getCategoryDataFromIs(): iterable {
    // exact implementation is not important
    // returns an iterable which each element looks like
    //   [
    //       'uuid' => '1bb2dd5d-92e0-4263-8ca3-d63aee840c62',
    //       'parent_uuid' => '3af3c39a-d4b0-4a59-9e36-2e5d54e7ca21',
    //       'name_en' => 'Electronics',
    //       'name_cs' => 'Elektronika',
    //       'description_1' => 'Description of Electronics',
    //       'description_2' => 'Description of Electronics in Czech',
    //   ];
}
```

Method returns data sorted exactly as they should be on the eshop, meaning category with the same parent will be first, if it comes first from the method.  
And to make matters worse, IS can only return all 10000 categories.

> ## First import

Reviewer: It was bit confusing for me, that I am following this guide and later I found, that there is better way. Maybe some info about it would be nice.

Author: 🤔 that's right, it's not the best solution in the first paragraph, but I tried to put it in a "improve the code on the way", it's not "now delete everything and writ this", or?

Author: I have added the info in d20c184e8

!!! note
    If you're not familiar with the concepts of creating data imports, take a look at the [Basic data import cookbook](./basic-data-import.md)

The main working loop is straightforward

```php
public function run(): void
{
    foreach ($this->getCategoryDataFromIs() as $importData) {
        $this->importCategory($importData);

>     }

Reviewer: I am not sure, if this is right thing to do. Because:

1. You have to load all 10 000 categories, but you can load them in batch (I hope) so it would be better practice
2. If it is not possible to batch them - I would maybe start with creating some type of queue (like saving raw data in database), because what will you do, when 9 999 product will fail? 
3. I would prefer to remove importedCategory from source array to better work with memory.

Author: Thanks for the ideas, 

1. I believe the exact implementation of the data loader is not important. I declared it as iterable, so you can easily return the generator and don't be bothered about batching here
2. related to 1., and I think it's above the scope of this cookbook
3. related to 1., I don't think it's necessary to have data as an array loaded in memory. Also, it's a good practice to remove elements from the array we currently iterate?

Reviewer: Ok, maybe add some note about best practices :)

Author: added in 401638197 :)

```diff
 private function mapImportDataToCategoryData(array $importData, CategoryData $categoryData): CategoryData
 {
     foreach ($this->domain->getAll() as $domainConfig) {
         $locale = $domainConfig->getLocale();
         $domainId = $domainConfig->getId();

         $categoryData->name[$locale] = $importData['name_' . $locale];
         $categoryData->descriptions[$domainId] = $importData['description_' . $domainId];
     }

     $categoryData->uuid = $importData['uuid'];
-    $categoryData->parent = $importData['parent_uuid'] ? $this->categoryFacade->getByUuid($importData['parent_uuid']) : null;

     return $categoryData;
 }
```

Also, we don't need the code for sorting siblings, but we need to build the array representing the sorted adjacency list (relation to the parent).

```diff
 private array $parentIdByCategoryId;

 private function importCategory(array $importData): void
 {
     // ...

-    $this->categoryRepository->persistAsLastChild($category);
-    $this->em->flush();
+    $parentCategoryIdOrNull = $importData['parent_uuid'] ? $this->categoryFacade->getByUuid($importData['parent_uuid'])->getId(): null;

> +    $this->$parentIdByCategoryId[$category->getId()] = $parentCategoryIdOrNull;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+    $this->parentIdByCategoryId[$category->getId()] = $parentCategoryIdOrNull;
```

 }
```

As we don't change the parent and we don't sort the siblings, it's no reason to recalculate the tree and the import is much faster.

> _Import finished in 7 minutes and 45 seconds_

## Bring back the sorting

Now we have all categories created or edited, and we have built the sorted array of ids with related parent ids.

```diff
+ use Shopsys\FrameworkBundle\Model\Category\CategoryNestedSetCalculator;

 public function run(): void
 {
     foreach ($this->getCategoryDataFromIs() as $importData) {
         $this->importCategory($importData);
     }
     
+    $categoriesSortingData = CategoryNestedSetCalculator::calculateNestedSetFromAdjacencyList($this->parentIdByCategoryId);
+    $this->categoryFacade->reorderByNestedSetValues($categoriesSortingData);
 }
```

> > _Import finished in 7 minutes and 50 seconds_

Reviewer: We have 16 mins against 20 minutes, just want to mention

Author: Sorry, I don't follow, can you please explain it a little bit further?

# Import Categories

Category import is one of the specific imports.
Due to the tree structure it's really easy to create ineffective script.
In this cookbook we highlight some concepts and how to improve category import performance.

## Task

> > _As an eshop owner I want to import categories from IS, so I don't need to edit categories in two places._

Author: fixed in the whole file in fb9516b87

(In your application it can be some kind of new field, for example `external_id`)

If a category is found on the shop, data are edited, otherwise the category is created.

So far so good, so let's run this import.

It's more than likely that the import will take much longer than we would like.

> _Import finished in 15 minutes and 30 seconds_

## Fix sorting

Our import works, but not exactly the way we want.
Categories should be sorted by position in the source data, but right now, when the position of the categories on the same level changes, this change is not propagated.
It's actually logical.
Position is not set anywhere, and the relation to the parent do not hold any positional information.

Fix is not that hard.
All we need to do is to start sorting categories while importing.

```diff
 private function importCategory(array $importData): void
 {
     // ...

+    $this->categoryRepository->persistAsLastChild($category);
+    $this->em->flush();
 }
```

> _Import finished in 20 minutes and 10 seconds_

Apart the increased import time, we also had to add two new dependencies, `CategoryRepository` and `EntityManager`.

## Better way

> One of the reasons, why the import take so long, is the category tree structure.

Author: fixed in fb9516b87

> After each flush, the nested set is recalculated for the tree and this take some time.

Author: fixed in fb9516b87
